=head1 NAME

cwb-decode - Decode CWB corpus into various text formats

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<cwb-decode> (-L|-H|-C|-Cx|-X) [-n] [-r I<registry_dir>]
    [-s I<start>] [-e I<end>] [-p | -f I<file>]
    I<corpus>  [-c I<attribute>] [-ALL]
    (-P I<attribute>|-S I<attribute>|-V I<attribute>|-A I<attribute>)+

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<TODO>

Decode CWB corpus I<corpus> as plain text (or in various other text formats). In normal mode, the entire corpus (or a segment specified with the C<-s> and C<-e> options) is printed on standard output. In matchlist mode (C<-p> or C<-f>), (pairs of) corpus positions are read from standard input or a file specified with C<-f>, and the corresponding tokens or ranges are displayed. The attribute declaration flags C<-P>, C<-S>, C<-V> and C<-A> determine which attributes will be printed; use C<-ALL> for all attributes. See L<"OUTPUT FORMATS"> below for available output modes.

B<NB:> command-line B<options> (which control the output format, range of corpus positions, etc.) must be specified before the I<corpus> name, while B<attribute declarations> (which select attributes to be displayed) must follow the I<corpus> name.


=head1 OPTIONS

  -L        Lisp output mode
  -H        concordance line ('horizontal') output mode
  -C        compact output mode (suitable for encode)
  -Cx       XML-compatible compact output (for "encode -x ...")
  -X        XML output mode
  -n        show corpus position ('numbers')
  -s <n>    first token to print (at corpus position <n>)
  -e <n>    last token to print (at corpus position <n>)
  -r <dir>  set registry directory
  -p        matchlist mode (input from stdin)
  -f <file> matchlist mode (input from <file>)
  -h        this help page

=over 4

=item B<TODO>

=back


=head1 ATTRIBUTE DECLARATIONS

  -P <att>  print p-attribute <att>
  -S <att>  print s-attribute <att> (possibly including annotations)
  -V <att>  show s-attribute annotation for each range in matchlist mode
  -A <att>  print alignment attribute <att>
  -ALL      print all p-attributes and s-attributes
  -c <att>  expand ranges to full <att> region (matchlist mode)

=over 4

=item B<TODO>

=back


=head1 OUTPUT FORMATS

B<TODO>


=head1 COPYRIGHT

=over 4

=item
B<IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB)> L<http://cwb.sourceforge.net/>

=item
Copyright (C) 1993-2006 by IMS, University of Stuttgart

=item
Copyright (C) 2007- by the respective contributers (see file F<AUTHORS>)

=back

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details
(in the file F<COPYING>, or available via WWW at
L<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>).

=cut

